---
layout: post
title:  "RESTX 1.1.0"
date:   2024-04-23 14:30:00
categories: news
author: "Fabien Hebuterne"
authorId: fhebuterne
---


Today we are very happy to announce release RESTX 1.1.0.

## Bugs

- Fixed injection of interface dependencies with Kotlin Sets.   
    _Note: In Java, it was already possible to have an interface Set injected, but this was not the case in Kotlin._
- JVM metrics were no longer displayed on the RESTX UI since 1.0.0.
- Added an Optional.isPresent() in the cache invalidation in RestxSession, which could sometimes lead to the error "Optional.get() cannot be called on an absent value".

## Improvements

- Added a `RestxRequest.getHeaders()` method on the RestxRequest interface.
- Added the ability to create "Criteria" objects to avoid too many QueryParams on a resource (thanks Frédéric and Nicolas).
    - Example: If you have 10 query params on a resource, you can group them together in a single object and RESTX will manage to put all the query params in the object.
- Added `RestxSession.invalidatePrincipal()` and `RestxSession.invalidate()` methods to facilitate cache invalidation on RESTX in the RestxSession.
- Add public keyword in RestxSession on some methods to avoid overloading RestxSession (and thus avoiding the package-private issue).

## Dependencies

- Servlet 5.0 updated to 6.0.
- Jetty 11 updated to 12.
- Tomcat 10.0 updated to 10.1.
- Hibernate, Logback, SLF4J-API, SnakeYAML, Metrics Dropwizard dependencies updated.
- RESTX UI updated to the latest version of AngularJS.

## Getting started / Upgrading

Want to get started now? Check out the [related doc](/docs/getting-started.html).

Upgrading from an earlier version?

- You need to update `restx.version` to `1.1.0`.
- Your project should now use Java 17 to work since RESTX `1.0.0`.

## Contributions

Thanks a lot to the [community](/community/) who made this possible, especially the [contributors](https://github.com/restx/restx/graphs/contributors) to this release:

- [Nicolas Roulon](https://github.com/restx/restx/commits?author=nroulon),
- [Frédéric Camblor](https://github.com/restx/restx/commits?author=fcamblor),
- [Fabien Hebuterne](https://github.com/restx/restx/commits?author=fhebuterne)
